Job
regulations for
international
students
in Germany
Information for
students
English version
Working in Germany
A part-time job provides you with the opportunity to gain experience,
get to know Germany, make contacts and supplement the financing
of your studies. It is very difficult to finance your studies and life in
Germany with a part-time job alone, and if you have a part-time job
that takes up a lot of time, your academic performance will suffer.
This may prolong your studies and, in the worst case, jeopardise
your residence title.
IMPORTANT For many student jobs, knowledge of German
is necessary.
Students from the EU/EEA/Switzerland
If you are a student with citizenship in a member state of the European Union (EU), the European Economic Area (EEA) or Switzerland
you may take up any type of work in Germany under the same
conditions as German students.
IMPORTANT If you are a student with citizenship in the
EU/EEA countries/Switzerland and have a part-time student
job or a paid internship in Germany, you must take out
health insurance in Germany. Your European Health
Insurance Card (EHIC) is then no longer valid. There are rare
exceptions to this – more information is available from the
health insurance company.
Students from third countries
with residence according to §16b Residence Act
The following regulations apply as of March 1, 2024
International students from third countries are allowed to work in
Germany for 140 full or 280 half working days per year. This is noted
in the (supplementary sheet to your) residence title. Alternatively,
employment of up to 20 hours per week is also permitted. Additional
approval from the foreigners’ registration office is not necessary in
these two cases. More precisely:
ʆ Only the working days that are actually worked are counted.
This means holidays, public holidays and sick days are not
counted.
ʆ Half working days are working days with up to 4 working hours.
ʆ These are calculated for each calendar year. For example: if the
employment contract starts on 1 July, the complete 140 full/
280 half working days can be worked until the end of this
calendar year on 31 December.
ʆ Days on which a voluntary internship is undertaken also count
towards these 140 full or 280 half working days. However,
compulsory internships as part of a degree programme do not
count.
ʆ If you wish to work more than the permitted number of days
you need prior and written approval from the foreigners’
registration office.
International students from third countries (§16b Residence Act)
are only allowed to work as fee-based workers or self-employed
persons with the permission of the foreigners’ registration office.
As a rule, self-employed persons are those who invoice the employer
for work performed (fee-based).
During a preparatory language course/internship placement or a
preparatory college course, as of March 1, 2024, international students from third countries (§16b Residence Act) may work in the
same way as during their studies.
IMPORTANT In addition to the 140 full or 280 half working
days, the following jobs are permitted: academic or student
assistant at the university, in the Studierendenwerk
(Student Service Organisation, STW) or in the students’
union (AStA/STURA), or jobs with a very close connection to
your studies, e.g. at an institute. As long as this does not
affect academic performance, this activity can be carried
out for an unlimited period of time. Permission from the
foreigners’ registration office is required for fee-based work.
Salary
The statutory minimum wage also applies to all students. It does
not apply to compulsory internship placements and internship
placements lasting less than three months.
IMPORTANT Employees receive a monthly pay slip from
their employer. Hours worked, social security contributions,
holidays and sick days are listed here. The pay slip holds
important information: please keep it as proof of your
monthly employment details and check whether the
information given here is correct.
Taxes and social security contributions
ʆ Anyone working in Germany needs a tax identification
number (“Steuer-ID”). You will automatically receive this by
post a few weeks after registering your residence. Please
keep this important information for further reference.
ʆ You only have to pay income tax in Germany if the tax
exemption limit (also called the tax-free allowance) is
exceeded.
ʆ An income tax return must be filed by anyone who is
self-employed or who exceeds the tax exemption limit.
The “Elster” internet portal is available for this purpose:
www.elster.de
ʆ For individual advice, students must contact a tax advisor
(subject to a fee).
IMPORTANT Different types of jobs are
also subject to different social security
contributions. Further information can be
found in the flyer “Jobbing” (“Working in
Germany”) from Deutsches Studierendenwerk (German National Association for
Student Affairs).
Social insurance
If you take up a job, your employer needs to register you with the
social security system. You will then automatically receive a
social security certificate via post, which also contains your
pension insurance number (Important: keep this document for
further reference). If you do not receive this certificate, you need
to contact the German Pension Insurance (Deutsche Rentenversicherung). Mini-jobbers (income up to 538 euros per month) can
ask their employer to exempt them from the pension insurance
obligation, which slightly increases their net income each month.
Health insurance
Anyone who works more than 20 hours per week is covered by
health insurance through work and is no longer covered by student health insurance or family health insurance. Private health
insurance can be terminated by the student. Please note: This does
not apply to temporary jobs of up to three months. (Students
covered by EHIC, please refer to the info box under section
“Students from the EU/EEA/Switzerland”.) Further information

can be found in the flyer “Jobbing” (“Working in Germany”) from
Deutsches Studierendenwerk, see QR code on the previous page.
IMPORTANT Those with family insurance should seek
advice from their health insurance company before
starting work in order to clarify their insurance cover.
Additional financing options
Scholarships ... are hardly ever awarded by higher education
institutions in Germany, unlike in other countries. Important
scholarship providers are the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) (www.funding-guide.de), Begabtenförderungswerke
(scholarships for talented individuals) (www.stipendiumplus.
de ) and foundations (www.stiftungssuche.de/stipendien).
German federal financial aid (BAföG) ... is available to international students only in very rare exceptions. Information is
available at www.bafög.de and from the social welfare advisory services of your local Studierendenwerk and from the BAföG
financial support agencies.
Student loans ... are often awarded according to the same access
requirements as BAföG and are thus rarely accessible to international students. However, some loan associations and education
funds are also available to international students. Caution:
Rising interest rates on student loans can harbour a debt risk.
Emergency and hardship grants ... in different forms are available
in the event of financial hardship through no fault of the student:
ʆ Financial support for students in emergency situations by
means of emergency or hardship grants of your local
Studierendenwerk
ʆ Emergency grants of the local Protestant or Catholic religious
communities and centres on your campus
NOTE If you consider applying for public social welfare
benefits (e.g. housing benefit, citizen’s income, etc.),
please seek advice beforehand, as this may seriously
affect your residence title!
doppelpunkt.com
Further advice and information for
international students
Studierendenwerke (social welfare advisory service,
student finance advisory service, international affairs)
https://www.studierendenwerke.de/deutsches-studentenwerk/studentenwerke/studierendenwerke-a-z/landkarte
DSW website on student jobs
www.studierendenwerke.de/themen/finanzierungsmoeglichkeiten/uebersicht-jobben
International Offices of the universities
https://www.daad.de/deutschland/in-deutschland/hochschule/en/9147-the-first-port-of-call/
www.daad.de | www.study-in.de
www.internationale-studierende.de
STWs–Student Service Organisations
Germany’s 57 Studierendenwerke (Student Service Organisations, STWs) are responsible for the economic, social, health
and cultural life of students:
ʆ Dining halls and cafeterias
ʆ Student residence halls
ʆ Student financial aid
ʆ Day care centres
ʆ Psychological and social counselling
ʆ Counselling for students with disabilities or chronic diseases
ʆ Cultural activities
Deutsches Studierendenwerk
(German National Association for Student Affairs)
Service Point for Intercultural Competence
www.studierendenwerke.de
As of 1 January 2024